# Project History

- Pre-launch: Zcash grew out of “Zerocash/Zerocoin,” an experimental proposal from seven scientists to improve privacy protections in Bitcoin. The Zerocoin company, known today as the Electric Coin Co., raised $3M in funding to develop the initial protocol.
- Creation: Zcash launched on October 28, 2016 by Electric Coin Co., a private company founded by Zooko Wilcox. Zcash relies on a novel mathematical proof called a zk-SNARK. “SNARKs are the engine that can quickly and efficiently verify a transaction and add it to the blockchain without revealing any details to the public.” SNARKs require a set of public parameters which allow users to construct and verify private transactions. These parameters are set up in an elaborate secure multi-party computation; for Zcash, this is known as the Trusted Setup.
- 2016 - 2018: After the Zcash launch, the Zcash engineering team released a series of upgrades known as the “Sprout series.” The team also put forward plans for two core protocol upgrades known as Overwinter and Sapling. The Sapling upgrade made efficiency improvements and enabled new kinds of core protocol features. The Zcash Foundation was formed in March 2017 with an initial endowment of 273,000 ZEC, taken from the Founder’s Reward. The Zcash Foundation organized the Powers of Tau ceremony, which was at the time the largest multi-party computation ceremony ever performed. In 2017, enterprise partnerships like the Zcash collaboration with JP Morgan further fueled a wider interest in blockchains and zk-SNARKs. The Sapling upgrade activated October 29, 2018, almost two years to the date from the initial Zcash launch.
- 2019-2020: In early 2019, the Zcash Company rebranded to the Electric Coin Co. to differentiate from Zcash the protocol and the Zcash Foundation. The Zcash community began a several-month-long governance discussion regarding the continuation of the Founder’s Reward and the Zcash trademark. In February 2019 it was revealed that a serious cryptographic flaw had affected the zk-SNARK proving system, called BCTV14, that was used by Zcash before the Sapling upgrade. This flaw could have allowed counterfeiting. The Electric Coin Co. stated in a blog post that they “believe that no one else was aware of the vulnerability and that no counterfeiting occurred in Zcash”. Electric Coin Co. announced a research project to increase the scalability of Zcash by 2021. One of the results of this research is the Halo proving system. Blossom, the third network upgrade for Zcash, activated in December 2019. This upgrade halved the target block interval, to 75 seconds. Funding discussions culminated in early 2020 with community consensus around ZIP 1014, a Zcash Improvement proposal that describes a structure for a newly established Zcash Development Fund. Heartwood, the fourth network upgrade is scheduled to activate in July 2020. Heartwood includes Flyclient support and shielded coinbase. Canopy is the next network upgrade, which activates in November 2020, ahead of Zcash’s first halvening.

