# Zcash Protocol

- Units and divisibility: The unit of account of the Zcash system is a ZEC. The ticker symbol used to represent Zcash is also “ZEC”. As a nod to Bitcoin’s creator, a zatoshi is the smallest amount within Zcash representing 0.00000001 ZEC, one hundred millionth of a ZEC.
- Funding Structure: Zcash pays out a portion of each block reward to fund protocol development and (for the first year) to pay back investors. During the first four years of Zcash, 10% of the block reward was transferred to the Founders Reward fund and distributed to the Electric Coin Co., Zcash Foundation and initial investors. After network upgrade 4, 8% of the block reward will be transferred to the Dev Fund and managed by a Major Grants Review Committee.
- Mining: Originally Zcash could be mined at home, using CPU or GPU machines. As mining hardware evolved, ASIC machines became the preferred mining machine for professional cryptocurrency miners and mining pools. ASICs can be customized for a particular use (such as mining Zcash) and therefore outperformed previous mining hardware such as CPUs and GPUs. Zcash community members voted against ASIC-resistant protocol updates in mid-2018 citing security concerns. The top mining pools for Zcash include Flypool, Nanopool and Slushpool. The next network upgrade, Heartwood includes ZIP 213, which would allow miners to mine directly to a shielded coinbase.
- Scalability: Scalability work is in progress. There are several approaches to making blockchains scalable, both at the protocol layer (layer 1) and at the application layer (layer 2). In September 2019, Sean Bowe, researcher at Electric Coin Co., proposed Halo, a novel technique for practical recursive zero-knowledge proofs. ECC researcher Daira Hopwood presented a research proposal for sharding architecture. This proposal calls for the use of sharding, a technique that partitions a database into sections or “shards” to improve the throughput limit, in order to scale to high transaction volumes.

